docs: add "Understanding PyTensor compilation" guide for PyMC users [first draft / RFC] (#8326)
pymc-devs/pymc: docs/source/learn/core_notebooks/pytensor_compilation.md

(pytensor_compilation)=

> # PyTensor, WTF?

Reviewer: more professional title?

Reviewer 2: Strong agree for change

Author: Done — title is now **PyTensor: a high level introduction**.

Reviewer: did you push?

Author: No. And that was an over eager agent commenting when I didn't ask it to. 

I have revisions. Need to perfect. Plan to push revisions over the weekend at some point

Reviewer: Maybe don't give it gh permissions to comment ;)

> **Author:** [Benjamin Vincent](https://github.com/drbenvincent)

Reviewer: do we put authors of core notebooks at all / at the top?

Reviewer 2: There are author tags on top and an authors section at the bottom

Author: Switched to the jupyter_style convention: `:::{post}` with `:author:` at the top and an `## Authors` section at the bottom. Removed the standalone `**Author:**` line.

> In your day-to-day modeling work, it is possible to write models exclusively in PyMC and never know about, or write any, PyTensor code. But PyTensor is a _crucial_ part of the modeling stack, and does a lot of work on your behalf every time you sample. Understanding what it does helps with questions like:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In your day-to-day modeling work, it is possible to write models exclusively in PyMC and never know about, let alone write, PyTensor code. Despite remaining in the background, the work Pytensor does on your behalf every time you sample makes it a crucial part of modeling stack. Understanding how it works helps with questions like:
```

Author: Adopted your suggested opening paragraph (with PyTensor capitalization and "the modeling stack").

- **Why does sampling sometimes take a while to even start?** That's compilation.
- **Why is the first run slow but later runs faster?** That's caching.

> - **Why should I use `pm.Data` instead of passing arrays directly?** Because `pm.Data` lets you update your data without recompiling — critical for iterative workflows.

Reviewer 2: Is this even true? I seldom use pm.Data :(

Author: Reworded to conditional framing — `pm.Data` when you need to swap observations without recompiling, not as a general recommendation.

- **Why does writing vectorized code matter even when the backend isn't Python?** Because vectorized expressions produce simpler graphs that the rewriter can optimise and translate more effectively.

This guide gives you a mental model of the pipeline and the choices available, without assuming you've ever written a line of PyTensor.

## The one-sentence mental model

When PyMC fits or samples a model, it asks PyTensor to turn symbolic math into fast, callable functions. What gets compiled depends on what you're doing:

- **Gradient-based MCMC** (NUTS, HMC): log-probability and its gradient — $\theta \to (\log p(\theta), \nabla \log p(\theta))$
- **Gradient-free MCMC** (Metropolis, Slice, DEMetropolis): log-probability only — $\theta \to \log p(\theta)$
- **Forward sampling** (`sample_posterior_predictive`, `sample_prior_predictive`): draws from the generative model — no log-probability at all

PyTensor does this in two stages: it first rewrites the symbolic math into a better form, then links that form into something executable using a chosen backend.

## The pipeline at a glance

> :::{figure} ../../images/pytensor_compilation.svg

Reviewer: I think this diagram is too much (also outdated from our iterations?)

Author: Diagram replaced with a linear 7-node flow (model → graph → prep → Stage 1 → Stage 2 → callable → sampler). Removed outdated internals (FunctionGraph, `useless`, etc.). Backend/sampler choices are prose-only now.

:width: 100%
:alt: A flowchart of the PyTensor compilation pipeline, from the PyMC model through graph preparation, Stage 1 graph rewriting, backend selection, and Stage 2 linking, to the compiled callable consumed by an MCMC sampler engine.

The full pipeline. Everything from the PyMC model down to the **compiled callable** is PyTensor's job; everything below it is the *sampler engine*. The two blue diamonds are the two choices you control: the **backend** (how the math is compiled) and the **sampler engine** (what repeatedly evaluates it).
:::

## Walking through the stages

### Graph preparation

PyMC hands PyTensor a symbolic graph — a recipe of mathematical operations, not yet any numbers. PyTensor clones it and prepares it for rewriting. This is bookkeeping; it's cheap.

### Stage 1 — rewriting (the "optimizer")

> Think of the graph PyMC hands over as a **rough draft** of your model's math. Before running anything, PyTensor behaves like a careful editor working through that draft: it rewrites the math to run faster, to use less memory, and — especially important for probabilistic models — to be numerically safe. The key thing is that none of these edits change *what* the math computes. They only change *how* it's written down. The answer is identical; the path to it is better.

Reviewer 2: too much bold/italics imo, reads like an SEO'd webpage

Reviewer 2: Also suspicious semicolon use. Should just be something like "The answer remains identical, while the path to it has been optimized'

Author: Stripped most bold/italics. Voice is direct technical prose now.

Three things are worth holding onto before we look at the individual edits:

- **It all happens in plain Python**, and the bigger your model, the longer it takes. This editing pass is a large part of the "why does sampling take a while to *start*?" pause. A big hierarchical model is a big draft, and a big draft takes longer to edit.
- **It happens the same way regardless of backend.** Whether you'll eventually run on Numba, C, JAX, PyTorch, or MLX, almost all of this rewriting happens first, in exactly the same way.

> - **Vectorized code helps here.** PyTensor rewrites the *graph*, not Python loops. NumPy-style vectorized expressions produce a compact graph the rewriter can simplify and translate cleanly; a Python `for` loop builds a much larger, deeper graph — even though the backend that eventually runs is not Python.

Reviewer 2: I know ricardo asked for it but this seems really shoehorned it. Very "one of these things is not like the other" energy.

Author: Moved vectorized-code point into graph preparation as a natural part of how graphs are built, not a separate bullet.

The subsections below walk through each editing pass, in the order they run — matching the "Stage 1" lane in the diagram. For a full catalogue of every available rewrite, see the {ref}`graph rewrites reference <pytensor:optimizations>`.

#### The to-do list of edits

> All the possible edits live in one long, **ordered to-do list**. Each edit has a number that fixes where it sits in the queue, and a few labels attached to it. When you compile, PyTensor does *not* run every edit on the list — it runs only the ones whose labels match the mode you picked. That is the real difference between `FAST_COMPILE` (run just a handful of quick edits, so you can start sampling sooner) and the default (run the full set, so sampling itself is fast). Choosing a compilation mode is really choosing *which edits are allowed to run*.

Reviewer 2: The rewriter is a fixed-point iterator, so I don't think the to-do list description is accurate.

Author: Replaced to-do-list framing with fixed-point iteration: modes select eligible rules, rules apply until equilibrium.

#### Tidying up: `merge`

> The first edit is an easy win. **Merge** spots when the same calculation appears more than once and makes the model compute it a single time, then reuse the result — like noticing you've added up the same column of numbers twice and deciding to do it once.

Reviewer 2: This is identifying common sub-expressions (CSE). I won't block the article based on the ELI5 tone if that's specifically what you're going for, but we should still include the correct technical language so users have the vocabulary necessary to go learn more.

Author: Section renamed to common subexpression elimination (`merge`) with CSE terminology.

> #### Speaking with one voice: `canonicalize`

Reviewer: I don't think we need this anthropomorphism of pytensor stages (in the headers)

Reviewer 2: Strong agree. The entire "editor" metaphor is tortured and borderline patronizing imo.

Author: Removed anthropomorphic headers and editor/recipe metaphors throughout. Section headers now use pass names and technical descriptions.

> There are usually many equally-valid ways to write the same expression. Left alone, that variety would force every later edit to recognise dozens of slightly different spellings of the same thing. **Canonicalize** prevents that by rewriting everything into one agreed-upon *standard form* — a house style for the math. Typical tidy-ups include flattening chains of additions and multiplications, folding constants, and removing terms that cannot change the answer (adding `0`, multiplying by `1`). Once the whole draft is written consistently, the later passes only have to look for one version of each pattern. This pass runs in a loop, applying its edits over and over until the draft stops changing (reaching an *equilibrium*); it keeps tidying until there's nothing left to tidy.

Reviewer 2: Constant folding is worthy of its own spotlight, especially since on large graphs in jax mode, users will see XLA warnings about it.

Author: Constant folding called out explicitly in the canonicalize section, including the JAX/XLA warning context.

#### Keeping the numbers safe: `stabilize`

> This is the pass PyMC users benefit from the most, even though they almost never see it work. Here is the problem it solves. Computers store numbers with only so many digits of precision, and some formulas that are perfectly correct on paper fall apart on a real computer.

Reviewer 2: important vocab: floating point precision. Consider mentioning half-precision calculation since everyone has a bee in their bonnet about GPUs.

Author: Added floating-point precision language in stabilize; noted reduced precision on GPU backends.

Take `log(1 + x)` when `x` is tiny — say `0.000000001`. The computer first works out `1 + x`, but it can't keep all those digits, so it rounds the result to exactly `1`. Then `log(1) = 0`, and your small-but-real value has simply vanished. The mathematically-identical function `log1p(x)` computes the same thing *without ever forming `1 + x`*, so the precision survives. **Stabilize** automatically swaps these fragile formulas for safe equivalents like that one.

:::{tip}
If you've ever wondered why PyMC so rarely spits out `NaN` or `inf` from ordinary-looking expressions full of logs and exponentials, this pass is a big part of the answer. It is quietly rewriting the danger out of your log-probability.
:::

#### Shortcuts and fewer passes over the data: `specialize` and `fusion`

> Two more speed-ups, both about doing less work. **Specialize** swaps a general-purpose operation for a faster special-case version whenever one exists — the way you'd compute `x²` as `x * x` instead of starting up a general "raise to any power" routine.

Reviewer 2: nit: prefer mathjax to unicode

Author: Switched to `$x^2$` MathJax.

> **Fusion** fixes a subtler waste. Imagine your model computes `a * b + c` element by element across big arrays. Done naively, the computer builds one whole temporary array to hold `a * b`, then another to hold `+ c` — a lot of memory shuffled around for nothing. Fusion merges these element-wise steps so each element gets *all* of its operations in a single pass, with no temporaries in between. Picture an assembly line where each item is fully finished at one station, instead of the entire batch being carried back and forth between stations.

Reviewer 2: Again i think the desire to be "accessible" is really holding you back here. You should really be talking about loops, and how many times you have to go over an array to do a computation. If your target audience really is people with zero idea about how computers work, it's not obvious at all where the loops even exist in an expression like `a * b + c`.

Author: Fusion section now describes array traversals and temporary allocations explicitly.

#### Last-minute, backend-aware edits: backend-specific rewrites and in-place ops

> The final edits depend on *where* your model is headed and on squeezing out memory. **Backend-specific** edits are small tweaks tailored to the backend you chose — a few extra tricks that only make sense for Numba, or only for JAX, and so on. Tricks that only help the C backend are dropped when you're not using it.

Reviewer 2: This isn't true in general, backend-specific rewrites can happen anywhere. For example solve_discrete_lyapunov has a jax version specific in specialize phase. I get that you're trying to tell this as a linear story but it's just not.

Author: Noted backend-specific rewrites can appear in multiple phases (e.g. `solve_discrete_lyapunov` in specialize).

> **In-place** edits save memory by letting an operation write its result directly over its input's memory, instead of allocating a brand-new array — like reusing the same sheet of scratch paper rather than grabbing a fresh one every time. Overwriting is risky, though: what if some other part of the graph still needs that data? So before any in-place edit runs, a "destroy handler" acts as a safety inspector, tracking exactly which chunks of memory are safe to reuse. (JAX skips in-place edits altogether — it manages memory in its own way.)

Reviewer 2: talking about the destroy handler is too deep in the weeds for this tone/presentation. I suggest something like "because we see the whole computation from start to finish, Pytensor is able to reason about when it would be safe to reuse memory. If it spots that some intermediate result is never going to be used again, it can re-use it as a scratch-pad or memory buffer in a later computation, saving expensive memory allocations"

Author: Removed destroy-handler name; explained whole-graph memory reuse in plain terms.

# Session-wide default for every compiled function
pytensor.config.linker = "jax"

# Or per function, overriding the session default
f = pytensor.function([x], y, mode="NUMBA")
```

The two choices — backend and sampler — are made at different points in the pipeline (see the two blue decision diamonds in the diagram), and they're mostly independent. For NUTS specifically, you pick the engine with `pm.sample(nuts_sampler=...)`:

- **`"pymc"`** — PyMC's built-in NUTS. The loop is pure Python and calls a PyTensor callable from any CPU backend (typically C or Numba).
- **`"nutpie"`** — runs the NUTS loop in Rust (via [`nuts-rs`](https://github.com/pymc-devs/nutpie)). It calls a PyTensor callable compiled to either the **Numba** or the **JAX** backend. This is the default when nutpie is installed.
- **`"numpyro"`** — NumPyro's NUTS, whose loop runs in **JAX**. It requires the **JAX** backend.
- **`"blackjax"`** — BlackJAX's NUTS, also a **JAX** loop requiring the **JAX** backend.

The one coupling to be aware of: the JAX-based engines (`numpyro`, `blackjax`, and `nutpie` in JAX mode) need PyTensor to have compiled the callable to JAX. PyMC handles wiring this up for you.

> #### Numba (the default)

Reviewer 2: It's nice to list out the backends but there's zero percent chance we keep this up to date. Maybe it's not a reason to not do it, but flagging it as high entropy.

Author: Collapsed the six per-backend subsections into the summary table only. Backend details live in one place now.

(pytensor_compilation)=
# PyTensor, WTF?

**Author:** [Benjamin Vincent](https://github.com/drbenvincent)

In your day-to-day modeling work, it is possible to write models exclusively in PyMC and never know about, or write any, PyTensor code. But PyTensor is a _crucial_ part of the modeling stack, and does a lot of work on your behalf every time you sample. Understanding what it is and how it works can help  explain two things PyMC users often wonder about:

- **Why does sampling sometimes take a while to even start?** That's compilation.
- **Why is the first run slow but later runs faster?** That's caching.

This guide gives you a mental model of the pipeline and the choices available, without assuming you've ever written a line of PyTensor.

## The one-sentence mental model

> When PyMC samples your model, it asks PyTensor to turn the model's math (the log-probability and its gradient) into a fast, callable function.

Reviewer: there are non gradient/non logprob samplers, the most famous one being sample_posterior_predictive

Author: Addressed — the mental model now lists three cases (gradient MCMC, gradient-free MCMC, forward sampling), and the Runtime section has a table mapping each task to what PyTensor compiles and typical samplers.

$$
\theta \to \big(\log(p(\theta)), \nabla \log(p(\theta))\big)
$$

PyTensor does this in two stages: it first rewrites the symbolic math into a better form, then links that form into something executable using a chosen backend.

## The pipeline at a glance

:::{figure} ../../images/pytensor_compilation.svg
:width: 100%
:alt: A flowchart of the PyTensor compilation pipeline, from the PyMC model through graph preparation, Stage 1 graph rewriting, backend selection, and Stage 2 linking, to the compiled callable consumed by an MCMC sampler engine.

The full pipeline. Everything from the PyMC model down to the **compiled callable** is PyTensor's job; everything below it is the *sampler engine*. The two blue diamonds are the two choices you control: the **backend** (how the math is compiled) and the **sampler engine** (what repeatedly evaluates it).
:::

## Walking through the stages

### Graph preparation

> PyMC hands PyTensor a symbolic graph — a recipe of mathematical operations, not yet any numbers. PyTensor clones it, resolves shared variables and updates, and wraps it in a {class}`~pytensor.graph.fg.FunctionGraph`. This is bookkeeping; it's cheap.

Reviewer: shared variables and updates are too technical to come up here. FunctionGraph is also a bit irrelevant

Author: Stripped — now just: PyMC hands PyTensor a symbolic graph, PyTensor clones it and prepares it for rewriting. No shared variables, updates, or FunctionGraph.

### Stage 1 — rewriting (the "optimizer")

Think of the graph PyMC hands over as a **rough draft** of your model's math. Before running anything, PyTensor behaves like a careful editor working through that draft: it rewrites the math to run faster, to use less memory, and — especially important for probabilistic models — to be numerically safe. The key thing is that none of these edits change *what* the math computes. They only change *how* it's written down. The answer is identical; the path to it is better.

Two things are worth holding onto before we look at the individual edits:

> - **It all happens in plain Python**, and the bigger your model, the longer it takes. This editing pass is a large part of the "why does sampling take a while to *start*?" pause. A big hierarchical model is a big draft, and a big draft takes longer to edit.

Reviewer: one thing worth mentioning somewhere is that's part of why writing vectorized/numpy-like code is still important. Not because loops are slow (we are not compiling to python), but because graphs are much simpler/easier to reason about.

Author: Added as a third bullet in the Stage 1 intro: vectorized/NumPy-style code produces a compact graph the rewriter can work with; Python `for` loops build a larger, deeper graph — not because the backend is Python, but because of graph structure.

- **It happens the same way regardless of backend.** Whether you'll eventually run on Numba, C, JAX, PyTorch, or MLX, almost all of this rewriting happens first, in exactly the same way.

The subsections below walk through each editing pass, in the order they run — matching the "Stage 1" lane in the diagram. For a full catalogue of every available rewrite, see the {ref}`graph rewrites reference <pytensor:optimizations>`.

#### The to-do list of edits

All the possible edits live in one long, **ordered to-do list**. Each edit has a number that fixes where it sits in the queue, and a few labels attached to it. When you compile, PyTensor does *not* run every edit on the list — it runs only the ones whose labels match the mode you picked. That is the real difference between `FAST_COMPILE` (run just a handful of quick edits, so you can start sampling sooner) and the default (run the full set, so sampling itself is fast). Choosing a compilation mode is really choosing *which edits are allowed to run*.

:::{dropdown} Under the hood

> Every rewrite lives in `pytensor.compile.mode.optdb`, a `pytensor.graph.rewriting.db.SequenceDB`. Entries register at a numeric `position` (merge at `0`, canonicalize at `1`, stabilize at `1.5`, specialize at `2`, fusion at `49`, inplace at `49.5`+) and run in that order. Each carries *tags* like `"fast_run"`, `"fast_compile"`, `"numba"`, `"inplace"`. The {class}`~pytensor.compile.mode.Mode` pairs a linker (Stage 2) with an *optimizer query* (`pytensor.graph.rewriting.db.RewriteDatabaseQuery`) that selects rewrites by tag: the default Numba mode queries `include=["fast_run", "numba"]`, while `FAST_COMPILE` queries `include=["fast_compile", "py_only"]`.

Reviewer: too technical imo

Author: Deleted the dropdown entirely. The main-text explanation of FAST_COMPILE vs default (choosing which edits run) is kept.

:::

#### Tidying up: `merge` and `useless`

> The first edits are easy wins. **Merge** spots when the same calculation appears more than once and makes the model compute it a single time, then reuse the result — like noticing you've added up the same column of numbers twice and deciding to do it once. **Useless** deletes steps that can't possibly change the answer: adding `0`, multiplying by `1`, or reshaping an array into the shape it already has. Small savings each, but they also leave a cleaner draft for the heavier edits that follow.

Reviewer: many rewrites not in useless (or shared between useless and other passes). Don't mention `useless` like that. It's a pass name, whose more accurate name is `one_pass_fast_rewrites_that_hopefully_reduce_graph_size`. adding 0 or mul 1 are actually canonicalize rewrites, because those are somewhat expensive rewrites

Author: Fixed — section renamed to "Tidying up: merge" only; all mention of the `useless` pass removed. Add-0/mul-1 examples moved to the canonicalize paragraph where they belong.

:::{dropdown} Under the hood
Merge is `pytensor.graph.rewriting.basic.MergeOptimizer` (registered as `merge1`, `merge1.1`, `merge2`, `merge3` at several positions). "Useless" is the `"useless"` entry at position `0.6`, a `pytensor.graph.rewriting.db.TopoDB` wrapping a `LocalGroupDB` of small `local_useless_*` node rewriters.
:::

#### Speaking with one voice: `canonicalize`

There are usually many equally-valid ways to write the same expression. Left alone, that variety would force every later edit to recognise dozens of slightly different spellings of the same thing. **Canonicalize** prevents that by rewriting everything into one agreed-upon *standard form* — a house style for the math. Once the whole draft is written consistently, the later passes only have to look for one version of each pattern. This pass runs in a loop, applying its edits over and over until the draft stops changing (mathematicians call that reaching a *fixed point*); it keeps tidying until there's nothing left to tidy.

:::{dropdown} Under the hood

> Canonicalize is an `pytensor.graph.rewriting.db.EquilibriumDB` at position `1` — "equilibrium" being the run-until-nothing-changes loop. Developers add a rewrite to it with the `@register_canonicalize` decorator from `pytensor.tensor.rewriting.basic`. Typical work: flattening `add`/`mul` chains, folding constants, and moving operations into a canonical position.

Reviewer: I don't think we need to mention decorator, or even the name of the database, just mention the rewrites are applied until an equilibrium (no further changes) is achieved

Author: Dropdown removed. Equilibrium concept kept inline in the main canonicalize paragraph ("runs in a loop … until reaching an equilibrium"). No decorator or database names.

:::{dropdown} Under the hood
`pytensor.link.pytorch.linker.PytorchLinker`; `pytorch_funcify` builds the function, compiled via `torch.compile` (TorchDynamo + Inductor).
:::

#### MLX

The same idea once more, this time aimed at the GPU built into Apple Silicon Macs.

:::{dropdown} Under the hood
`pytensor.link.mlx.linker.MLXLinker`; `mlx_funcify` builds an MLX function compiled lazily with `mx.compile`.
:::

#### Python VM

The simplest backend of all: **no compiling whatsoever**. PyTensor just runs each operation one at a time in plain Python. That makes it the slowest to actually run, but instant to "build" and by far the easiest to debug (you can drop into any step with ordinary Python tools). It's what `FAST_COMPILE` uses, and it's a great companion while you're still iterating on a model's structure.

:::{dropdown} Under the hood
`pytensor.link.basic.PerformLinker` (or `pytensor.link.vm.VMLinker` with `use_cloop=False`) steps through the graph calling each op's `Op.perform`.
:::

### Runtime

> Functionally, the compiled callable is a map from a **point in parameter space** to the model's **log-probability and its gradient**: `θ → (logp(θ), ∇logp(θ))`. The observed data isn't an argument — it's baked into the function as constants when the function is built. (PyMC actually compiles a few such functions: the log-density and its gradient for sampling, plus functions for drawing from priors/posterior predictive.)

Reviewer: if the data comes from a pm.Data it's not backed in as a constant. Maybe a good point to mention `freeze_dims_and_data` model transform

Reviewer: If you want, one important thing for very advanced users, we always want to use `pytensor.function(..., trust_input=True)` which avoids expensive input checks but can crash hard if you pass invalid inputs or return incorrect results if you pass aliased inputs. Because the sampler controls the inputs (the sampler point) we can do it safely

Author: Corrected — plain NumPy arrays are folded in as constants; `pm.Data` stays mutable via `pm.set_data` without recompilation. Added a sentence on `freeze_dims_and_data` for treating data as compile-time constants.

Author: Skipped for this overview — agreed it's too advanced for the audience here. Happy to add a collapsed callout in a follow-up if you think it's worth it.

**This is the key boundary.** Everything above the compiled callable in the diagram is *PyTensor* turning your model's math into a function. Everything below it is a *sampler engine* repeatedly calling that function. The sampler is a separate piece of software with its own loop; PyTensor's job is finished once the callable exists.

A common misconception is worth heading off: with nutpie it's easy to assume "the fast Rust thing" is doing the compilation. It isn't — the Rust is the *sampler loop*, not a PyTensor compilation backend. PyTensor still builds the logp/gradient function that the Rust loop evaluates.

## Caching: why the second run is faster

PyTensor caches the **linked artifact** so repeated builds can skip recompilation:

- **Numba** keeps an on-disk cache (enabled by default via `numba__cache`).
- **C / CVM** caches compiled `.so` modules in your compile directory.

> Note a current limitation that matters in practice: the cache is for the *linked* output. Stage 1 rewriting is **not** cached and is re-run on every build, even for a structurally identical model.

Reviewer: Thinks will change with https://github.com/pymc-devs/pymc/pull/8330

Author: Softened — no longer states Stage 1 is definitively uncached. Now notes PyTensor's on-disk cache covers Stage 2 linking, Stage 1 rewriting is re-run today, and PyMC is improving this with model-level function caching (didn't pin a PR number in the doc).
